=head1 NAME

pacdep - Package Dependencies listing

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<pacdep> [I<OPTION>..] I<PACKAGE>..

=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item B<-h, --help>

Show a little help screen and exit

=item B<-V, --version>

Show version information and exit

=item B<-d, --debug>

Flood debug info to stdout

=item B<-c, --config=FILE>

Use B<FILE> to configure ALPM instead of I</etc/pacman.conf>

=item B<-d, --dbpath=PATH>

Specify an alternate database location

=item B<--from-sync>

Only look for specified package(s) in sync databases. By default pacdep looks in
the locap database first, and if not found then looks in sync databases.

While this should be good most of the times, it doesn't allow to get information
about a package from sync databases, if said package is not installed but
another package, acting as provider, is.

Note that this does not affect the search for providers of dependencies, only
of the package(s) specified on command line (or stdin).

=item B<-q, --quiet>

Only output packages name and size. All titles and totals will be omitted. This
is mostly useful (alongside B<--raw-sizes>) for use in scripts.

The names and sizes of specified packages are still listed first. If no option
to list dependencies was used, nothing else will be shown.

In case of of the specified name is provided by another package, the line will
contain the specified name, the package name (provider), and its size.

=item B<-w, --raw-sizes>

Show full sizes in bytes, without any formatting/thousand separator.

=item B<-z, --sort-size>

When listing dependencies, by default packages are sorted (within their groups)
by names. With this option they'll be sorted by size (descendingly).

=item B<-p, --show-optional>

Take optional dependencies into consideration. This will include optional
dependencies if they're not explicitly installed (unless B<--explicit> was used),
and aren't required/dependency of an installed package.

Specify this option twice to also include packages that are dependencies of
installed package.

Specify it a third time to include all optional dependencies. This will include
both explicitly installed packages, as well as non-installed packages.

See L<B<NOTES>|/NOTES> below.

=item B<-x, --explicit>

Don't ignore explicitly installed dependencies

=item B<-r, --reverse>

Enable reverse mode, listing packages that require the specified packages
instead of their dependencies (hence, going through the dependency tree in
I<reverse>.)

Note that this option can be specified multiple times, and not all options
apply to this mode, see L<B<REVERSE MODE>|/REVERSE MODE> below for more about
it.

=item B<-R, --list-requiredby>

List packages requiring specified packages. This only works with, and implies,
B<--reverse>

=item B<-e, --list-exclusive>

List exclusive dependencies

=item B<-E, --list-exclusive-explicit>

List exclusive explicit dependencies. Implies B<--explicit>

=item B<-s, --list-shared>

List shared dependencies

=item B<-S, --list-shared-explicit>

List shared explicit dependencies. Implies B<--explicit>

=item B<-o, --list-optional>

List optional dependencies. Implies B<--show-optional>

Note that to specify B<--show-optional> multiple times, you still need to
include it as many times as needed (i.e. 2 or 3)

=item B<-O, --list-optional-explicit>

List optional explicit dependencies. Implies B<--show-optional> and B<--explicit>

Note that to specify B<--show-optional> multiple times, you still need to
include it as many times as needed (i.e. 2 or 3)

=back

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<pacdep> is a small tool that will allow you to quickly see how much space is
being used/required by a package (and its dependencies).

You can use a single dash (-) as package name, to have package names be read
from stdin.

By default, it will give the installed size of the package, its exclusive
dependencies, and its shared dependencies; Optional dependencies can be
included as well. See L<B<DEPENDENCY GROUPS>|/DEPENDENCY GROUPS> below 

Unless B<--from-sync> was used, B<pacdep> searches the local database first,
and if not found searches all sync databases. Package names are prefixed by the
repository name they were found in when they're not from the local database.

You can have dependencies of a group listed, in which case the packages name
and installed size will be shown.

=head2 Package size

After the package's installed size, in parenthesis will be the installed size
of the package and its exclusive (and optional, if B<--show-optional> was used)
dependencies.

If the package is from local database (i.e. is installed), only dependencies
from local databases are taken into account  If it is from a sync database
(i.e. is not installed), only dependencies from sync databases are taken into
account.

In other words, this size represents either the size the package and its
dependencies are using on the system (size that could potentially be freed if
removing the package and its dependencies), or the size needed to install them.

=head1 DEPENDENCY GROUPS

Packages marked as explicitly installed are ignored by default as dependencies.
You can use option B<--explicit> to count them in, in which case they'll be
listed under special groups (e.g. "shared explicit dependencies").

Dependencies are classified in the following groups :

=head2 Exclusive dependencies

Dependencies are considered to be exclusive when either no other packages
depends on them, or those who do are not installed, or are exclusive or
optional dependencies.

=head2 Optional depedencies

Optional dependencies are listed according to how many times option
B<--show-optional> is used :

- Once, only optional dependencies that aren't required by another package
  installed (and outside the tree of dependencies, see B<NOTES> below).

- Twice, include dependencies required by other installed packages.

- Three times, include non-installed dependencies as well. (Explicitly installed
  dependencies are also automatically included.)

=head2 Shared dependencies

Dependencies are considered shared when they are required by at least one other
package installed on the system that isn't an optional or exclusive dependency.

=head1 REVERSE MODE

When option B<--reverse> is used, instead of listing the dependencies of the
specified packages, B<pacdep> will list packages that require them (i.e. the
dependency tree is browsed in reverse).

By default only immediate "requirers" are listed, i.e. packages that have one of
the specified packages as dependency.

Specifying the option a second time will go through the entire dependency tree,
until a package that isn't required is found. All packages met will be listed.

Specifying the option a third time will go through the dependency tree all the
same, but only the end packages (that aren't required) will be listed.

=head2 Optional Requirements

You can use option B<--show-optional> and B<--list-optional> in reverse mode as
well. Note that in this case, specifying option B<--show-optional> more than onc
will not have any effect.

Instead of listing optional dependencies, packages that have one of the
specified packages as optional dependency will be listed. Obviously, there's no
difference whether option B<--reverse> based on how many times B<--reverse> was
used.

=head1 NOTES

Any packages present in the dependency tree will be shown, even if it would
otherwise fail those criteria. For example, say "mkinitcpio" has "xz" as
optional dependency, "xz" is also a dependency of "systemd" and all three
packages are installed.

Running `pacdep -o mkinitcpio` would list "xz" as optional dependency, even
though it is required by another package ("systemd"), because it is also a
dependency of "libarchive" which is itself a dependency of "mkinitcpio"; In
other words "xz" was going to be listed anyway, so it simply switched group,
from shared to optional dependencies.

=head1 BUGS

They're probably crawling somewhere in there... if you happen to catch one (or
more), report it and I'll do my best to squash it.

=head1 REPOSITORY

You can find the latest source code of B<pacdep> as well as report bugs and/or
suggest features on its GitHub repository, available at
L<https://github.com/jjk-jacky/pacdep>

=head1 AUTHOR

=over

=item Olivier Brunel <i.am.jack.mail AT gmail DOT com>

=back

